# Guidelines for contributing to the JSON Schema project

## Contributing to JSON Schema Specification

Thanks for taking the time to contribute! üéâüëç

JSON Schema is an evolving language. This repository contains the specification
text as well as Pull Requests with suggested improvements and contributions.

Contributions that do not change the interpretation of the spec but instead
improve legibility, fix editorial errors, clear up ambiguity and improve
examples are encouraged and are often merged by a spec editor with little
process.

However, contributions that *do* meaningfully change the interpretation of the
spec must follow the [Specification Development Process](./PROCESS.md).

## Issues

Issues should identify a problem, enhancement, or use case; and propose some
course of action for the draft. For alternate support channels, see the
[SUPPORT.md](https://github.com/json-schema-org/.github/blob/main/SUPPORT.md).

## Pull Requests

We welcome pull requests, both for editorial suggestions and to resolve open
issues.

If the pull request would solve a particular issue, reference the issue in the
pull request description.

Changes that would affect implementation behavior should typically be opened as
an issue first.

Generally, pull requests should be made to the `main` branch unless it is a
patch update and we are in a patch phase. In that case there will be a branch
named something like `2020-12-patch` that the PR should target instead.

Most PRs, including all PRs that impact implementation behavior, will be left
open for a minimum of 14 days. Minor wording fixes may be merged more quickly
once approved by a project member.

## Milestones

Each milestone is an estimation of the work that will be done for the next
draft. Milestones are typically named after the meta-schema draft number, and
the *open* milestone with the lowest draft number is the current active project.

Issues may be removed from a milestoned due to lack of consensus, lack of anyone
with the correct expertise to make a PR, or simply because we wish to publish a
draft and defer the remaining issues to the next draft.

Numbered milestones other than the lowest-numbered one are used to tentatively
organize future work, but may be completely reorganized once work on that draft
actually begins.

The `draft-future` milestone is for issues for which there is an agreement that
they should be addressed, but no specific timeline.

## Code of Conduct

All official channels including the mailing list, GitHub organization and Slack
server, follow our
[Code of Conduct](https://github.com/json-schema-org/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## Have Questions?

You can join the `#specification` channel in our
[Slack workspace](https://json-schema.org/slack) to interact with other
community members involved in the Specification development, share new ideas and
ask questions.

